# pathGrid
pathGrid is a set of scripts and functions that calculates and plots statistics of great circle paths on a geodetic grid.

The purpose of this project is to detect regions of attenuation of very-low-frequency (VLF) radio waves in the Earth-ionosphere waveguide, caused by
extreme solar flares, using VLF waves launched by lightning strokes and detected by the [World Wide Lightning Location Network (WWLLN)](wwlln.net).  Results of this
technique, applied to the solar storm of September 2017, were presented at the February 2019 AGU Chapman Conference on "Challenges Related to Space Weather Forecasting Including Extremes", and published in the accompanying special issue of *Space Weather*:

**Anderson, T. S.**, McCarthy, M. P., & Holzworth, R. H. (2020). Detection of VLF attenuation in the Earth-ionosphere waveguide caused by X-class solar flares using a global lightning location network. *Space Weather*, 18, e2019SW002408. [doi:10.1029/2019SW002408](https://doi.org/10.1029/2019SW002408)

April 15, 2022: The next updates to this project will be:

1. running analysis for recent X- and M-class flares,
2. incorporating and analyzing sferic dispersion, and
3. cleaning up documentation and packaging a release.


Ideally the analysis of X-class flares will be ready by the end of April.  If you want to try this out with your own data, send me a message and I'll help you get started!

This code is fast enough to run in "near-real-time"; that is, it takes less than an hour to run a full day of WWLLN data, and theoretically could run on 10-minute files with less than 10 minutes of runtime per file.  However, I'm not sure it's worth developing a real-time version of this analysis until there is a better science case for using this analysis on non-flare days, **and** I have reduced runtime enough to make analysis of many years of WWLLN data feasible.  If you disagree, and want to see a real-time version of this project, let me know!

## Current full pathGrid workflow
1. ensure working directory contains daily APfiles for flare days, as well as all scripts mentioned in this procedure.
2. edit ```getPathsFromAP.m``` to point to day or days relevant to analysis: ```startnum```, ```stopnum```, ```starttime```, and ```stoptime``` need to be edited.
3. run ```getPathsFromAP.m``` to generate stroke-station path files
4. run ```pathGrid_fullstats_10m.m``` to generate statistics on grid crossings
5. run ```pathgGrid_video.m``` to generate .mp4 video of grid crossings statistics over time range

## Remote workflow (APfiles on flash5, processing on flashlight): 
Run ```run_pathgrid.m```, which does the following:

1. loads dates of interest generated by ```flare_import.m``` (e.g. X-class flare days)
2. for each date, 
   a. get pathlist files with ```getpaths.m```
   b. get ```grid_crossings```, ```mm_gridcross```, ```d_gridcross``` with ```pathgrid.m```
   c. create AVI video of grid_crossings./mm_gridcross (including smoothing) with ```animate_pg.m```

## TO DO (April 15, 2022):
1. Trim the fat! Functions in remote workflow include ugly comment blocks and are not memory-efficient; e.g., should not need to both pass entire ```pathlist_lite``` to ```pathgrid``` and load 10-minute pathlist files.
2. enable control of ```animate_pg``` statistics and plotting options with optional arguments.
3. get proper benchmarks working: started running x_days only on April 15 at about 17:50 PDT.
